i would say relax
don't worry about the debt uh don't
worry about the debt until the virus is
gone and actually don't worry about the
debt after the virus is gone that was
nobel prize winning economist paul
krugman
telling you don't worry about the debt
i'm going to show you i'm going to show
you a chart on screen right now
does that look like something you should
worry about
you know if you zoom in here if you just
look at the part that's blue
2016 17 18 19. you know
it used to be that people on the left
the mainstream left as well as the far
left
it used to be the people on the left
criticized
donald trump for what you see there with
the debt the united states america
getting worse and worse and worse and
then oh look at that
2020 it's not just a little bit worse is
it
why why do you think it is that the
mainstream left the center
left the moderate left is saying
what paul krugman is saying that they're
saying
don't worry about the dead
what a preposterous thing to say whether
cynically or sincerely given that it is
donald trump who's to blame for this
debt
wouldn't it be reasonable wouldn't it be
reasonable to worry
it's not asking a whole lot to worry
about the debt
quote the u.s is about to vastly
increase its debt
period that's a good thing period
what a headline quote the scare stories
about government debt are back
period ignore them wow it sure seems
like there's a chorus of expert opinion
quoted in mainstream center-left
publications like the new york times and
the guardian
they're all trying to convince you that
what you see on this chart this
big scary red line that that's nothing
to be scared of at all
what do you think possibly could
motivate this oh well um
countries never go bankrupt right
no countries do go bankrupt
all the time there are millions of
people
suffering terribly all around the world
right now because their
country their government went
bankrupt because of sovereign
debt defaults
in this world there are no heroes
and there are no villains there are
people who care
and there are people who don't the
reality is the left wing
doesn't have a monopoly on caring
you and i right now we get to choose
whether we care or we don't whether
we're willing to learn truth from facts
face up to empirical reality or
we're going to insist on a fiction and
disregard the facts
for that reason you ever heard of
argentina
oh oh but argentina going bankrupt
that was ancient history that was a real
long time ago right
2002 2002 is ancient history to you
you think that doesn't count you think
what happened to argentina
can't happen to canada it can
have you checked the newspaper headlines
lately
about argentina maybe didn't make it
into your news
argentina is still dealing with its
bankruptcy with its sovereign debt
crisis
it's still dealing with the consequences
of what happens when you have the
attitude of
nobel prize winning economist paul
krugman of just
not worrying about your debt for just a
little bit too
long they're still dealing with that to
this day argentina heads for ninth
sovereign debt default these are
headlines from 2020.
this is news here and now these are the
consequences
people are dealing with you know what
kind of consequences they include
they include people starving to death
they include people dying
because hospitals don't have electricity
they include diseases from the dark ages
returning
because the government can't employ
sanitation workers to collect
garbage anymore our civilization
in the 21st century it's impressive
but it's fragile if you take away just
one of the things
one of the services the government
provides that we've all come to rely on
day in and day out
you take away garbage collection you
take away electricity
you take away running water or water
purification
cleaning services just one of those and
very rapidly
the gleaming towers of our most
beautiful cities
become uninhabitable hell holes plagues
from 500 years ago can return
and yes the convenience of going to
grocery stores is amazing the
convenience
of buying food grown and manufactured
all over the world is
incredible that supply chain
is also frighteningly fragile as is
shown
right now in lebanon have you seen these
headlines
i'm not asking have you been looking for
these headlines i'm asking if you've
seen them
it's most likely they haven't been
discussed on the
news program you choose to watch or in
the newspaper that you happen to have
seen
people in lebanon are starving
to death today
this is a sovereign debt crisis
unfolding
right now in the year 2020
and in case you think it was caused by
coronavirus
and you're wrong quote
millions of people are watching their
savings and salaries disappear
as food inflation hits nearly 200
percent
muhammad stood in the market trying to
calculate how much food he could afford
for himself
his wife and two children in the end he
decides on potatoes for dinner
three potatoes sliced up with half a red
pepper and some cucumbers on the side
that would have to be dinner for four
quote before the dollar crisis
my monthly salary as a freelance
accounting assistant would last 15 to 20
days
now it's only enough for five days
i think they will probably make all of
us leave our jobs at the end of july
my family already passed the minimum
that we can survive on we borrow from
the market to eat
for the rest of the month now i'm just
going to show you this
this chart again and you see how the
blue lines were going up up up
under donald trump before we already had
a debt crisis long before
this coronavirus thing started happening
many of you i'm sure are not
watching the united states you say well
maybe this is just a uniquely american
problem no it's global
okay you can take a look here the total
debt
on planet earth that's actually the
calculus being shown in this chart
debt was a problem globally worldwide
but if we just look here at the united
states
you look at that gradual increase
before coronavirus under donald trump
now look look at this chart this is the
gradual
increase in lebanon
before their economy collapsed before
their government declared
that they just had too much debt
couldn't make the interest payments
anymore you know that it's not that much
difference between two years especially
oh wow look at this
see where the red arrow is that's
exactly the same curve
but now we're going back all the way to
the year 2000
and that increase in debt looks even
more humble
even more reasonable right
the societies we live in are fragile
if you're on the left if you're on the
right if you're in the sen no matter
what
ask yourself do you care do you care
about reality
do you care about what happened to the
people of lebanon do you care about what
happened to the people of argentina
face up to the reality first and then
theorize don't tell me that you've got
some gleaming economic theory
that just requires me to disregard this
kind of reality
to believe in it quote lebanon must now
choose
between honoring its debts and providing
the most basic
services to its citizens
how can we pay the creditors while there
were people in the streets
without money to buy a loaf of bread
you think this is a game you think this
is something to score political points
on
in this little pantomime of democrat
versus republican
or in canada the liberal party versus
the conservative party
it's not a game this has unspeakably
terrible consequences for the future of
millions and millions of people when
individuals run up too much credit card
debt
they can go bankrupt when lebanon
the country the government goes bankrupt
do you think the people of lebanon can
run away as refugees to syria
think about what happens next as one
domino after another begins to fall
now the finance minister went to great
lengths to brag about the low interest
rates that he's paying on the debt as
though
he somehow set those interest rates
himself those interest rates
are temporary and they're only made
possible by the cornucopia of cash
that is coming out of the bank of canada
a bank which has print
created through keystrokes on a computer
about 400 billion dollars of new
currency
for government spending in less than 100
days
this government has now smashed through
the trillion
dollar debt mark 1.06
trillion dollars is the size of canada's
national debt
a deficit of 343
billion dollars we expected the finance
minister would arrive here today with a
plan
to bring our economy back to life
instead what he did is brag
that his plan is the most expensive plan
in the g7 he said because
it consumes 10 of gdp higher than any
other g7 country
and higher than the g20 average because
it spends the most money
because it is the most costly it must
therefore be the best but of course
it has simultaneously produced the worst
results
i've shown you this chart before but i
now want to draw your attention
to the headline i've got on the right
hand side of the screen
america is on track for a four trillion
dollar deficit in 2020.
should it matter you can already guess
this article
just like the other headlines i showed
you it's somewhat more smarmy in stating
it but it's telling you
it doesn't matter don't worry about the
debt oh on the contrary
every uh well-intentioned high-minded
liberal
every left-of-center sophisticated
urbanite person
ought to go around reassuring others
that it's just a misconception
that government debt is just it's just a
misconception that governments can go
bankrupt and this can have terrible
consequences
for people right and who is this guy i
looked into him
who is the author of this article he
describes himself
as offering a center-left perspective
he basically writes freelance propaganda
for the
progressive policy institute it's no
surprise
most of what the progressive policy
institute enforces
is massive levels of government deficit
spending
in order to achieve their particular
left-of-center
social and economic goals just like paul
krogman
stereotypically the right wing
cares about austerity while the left
does not and the mainstream left like
paul krugman they actually deserve the
harshest criticism on this
it's people in the center it's the
moderates in the middle
that deserve the harshest criticism but
in praxis
conservatives care about tax cuts
not balanced budgets keep that in mind
austerity is meaningless if it's
combined
with tax cuts with lower taxes for the
wealthy
because the outcome of the government
being deeper in debt
is still the same i would say relax
don't worry about the debt don't worry
about the debt until the virus is gone
and actually don't worry about the debt
after the virus is gone
paul krugman says don't worry about the
dead
i'm saying to you worry
you also can end up like argentina
you also can end up
like lebanon